BLOG: CI/CD Improvements update (#101)
2i2c-org/2i2c-brochure: content/blog/2022/ci-cd-improvements/index.md

- We should be able to **upgrade a specific hub** alone, by inspecting which configuration files have been added or modified.
- **Production hubs should be upgraded in parallel** when they are effectively run independently.
- We should **use staging hubs as "canary" deployments** and not continue upgrading production hubs if the staging hub fails.

## An overview of our changes

To accomplish this, we needed to identify which hub required an upgrade based on file additions/modifications.
This took a lot of discussion and iteration on design, and so we share it below in the hopes that it is helpful to others!

### Improvements to our code and structure

We made a few major changes to [the infrastructure repository](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure) to facilitate the deployment logic described above.
Here are the major changes we implemented:

- We separated out each hub's configuration into its own file, or set of files. For example, [here is 2i2c's `staging` hub configuration](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure/blob/master/config/clusters/2i2c/staging.values.yaml).

> - We created a separate `cluster.yaml` file that holds the canonical list of hubs deployed to that cluster and the configuration file(s) associated with each one. For example, [here is 2i2c's GKE cluster configuration](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure/blob/master/config/clusters/2i2c/cluster.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We created a separate `cluster.yaml` file that holds the canonical list of hubs deployed to that cluster and the configuration file(s) associated with each one. For example, [here is 2i2c's GKE cluster configuration](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure/blob/master/config/clusters/2i2c/cluster.yaml), which contains a reference to the previously mentioned [staging hub](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure/blob/master/config/clusters/2i2c/cluster.yaml#L14-L26).
```

- We updated [our deployer module](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure/tree/master/deployer) to do the following things:
  - Inspect the list of files modified in a Pull Request.
  - From this list, calculate the name of a hub that required an upgrade, and the name of its respective cluster.

>   - Trigger a GitHub action that would deploy changes in-parallel for each cluster/hub pair.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Trigger a GitHub Actions workflow that would deploy changes in parallel for each cluster/hub pair.
```

> In addition to these structural and code changes, we also developed new GitHub Actions that control the entire process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to these structural and code changes, we also developed new GitHub Actions workflows that control the entire process.
```

### A GitHub Actions workflow for upgrading our JupyterHubs

> We defined a new GitHub Action that carries out the logic described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We defined a new GitHub Actions workflow that carries out the logic described above.
```

These are all defined in [this `deploy-hubs.yaml` configuration file](https://github.com/2i2c-org/infrastructure/blob/master/.github/workflows/deploy-hubs.yaml).

> Here are the major steps in this action, and what each does:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the major jobs in this workflow, and what each does:
```

1. `generate-jobs`: Generate a list of clusters/hubs that must be upgraded, given the files that are changed in a Pull Request.
   - Evaluate an input list of added/modified files in a PR
   - Decide if the added/modified files warrant an upgrade of a hub
   - Generate a list of hubs and clusters that require upgrades, and some extra details:
     - Does the support chart that is deployed to the cluster also need an upgrade?
     - Does a staging hub on this cluster require an upgrade?

   This produced two outputs to be used in subsequent steps:

   - A **human-readable table** including information on _why_ a given deployment requires an upgrade (using the excellent [Rich library](https://github.com/Textualize/rich)).

>    - A **JSON output** that can be interpreted by GitHub Actions as a set of matrix jobs to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **JSON outputs** that can be interpreted by GitHub Actions as sets of matrix jobs to run.
```

There are actually two JSONs produced: one that is read by `upgrade-support-and-staging` and the other read by `filter-generated-jobs` and `upgrade-prod-hubs`. I'm not sure how critical this info is for a blog post though.

>    % TODO: Can we add an image of this nice table in the post?

Reviewer: I took a couple of partial screenshots - it's quite a long table when everything needs upgrading, so I wasn't able to get everything in without making the font tiny

<img width="840" alt="Screenshot 2022-04-25 at 13 25 32" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/44771837/165088695-cca1750f-9323-4e56-9a79-c3cd5997f9ef.png">

<img width="597" alt="Screenshot 2022-04-25 at 13 25 42" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/44771837/165088688-1577a4f2-14b9-4029-a312-c1adcac6ac7a.png">

2. `upgrade-support-and-staging`: Update the support and staging Helm charts on each cluster. These are "shared infrastructure" Helm charts that control services that are shared across all hubs.
   - Accepts the JSON list described above to determine what to do next
   - Parallelises over clusters
   - Upgrades the support chart of each if required
   - Upgrades a staging hub for the cluster if required (for canary deployments, this is always required if at least one production hub is to be upgraded on the cluster)
3. `filter-generate-jobs`: Allows us to treat the support / staging hubs as canary deployments for all the production hubs on a cluster.
   - If a staging/support hub deploy fails, removes any jobs for the corresponding cluster.
   - Allows production deploys to continue on _other clusters_.
4. `upgrade-prod-hubs`: Deploy updates to each production hub.
   - Accepts the JSON list described above to determine what to do next
   - Parallelises over each production hub that requires an upgrade
   - Deploy the relevant changes to that hub

## Concluding Remarks

> We think that this is a nicely balance of infrastructure complexity and flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We think that this is a nice balance of infrastructure complexity and flexibility.
```

typo

> It allows us to separate the configuration of each hub and cluster, which makes each more maintainable.

Reviewer: Do we also want to mention that separating config like this also improves the pathway to R2R since communities can easily find and extract their hub's config?

It allows us to remove the interdependence of deploy jobs that do not _need_ to be dependent, which makes our deploys more efficient.

> Finally, it allows us to make _targeted deploys_ more effectively, which reduces the amount of toil and unnecessary waiting associated with each change. (it also [reduces our carbon footprint by reducing unnecessary GitHub Action time](https://github.blog/2021-04-22-environmental-sustainability-github/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, it allows us to make _targeted deploys_ more effectively, which reduces the amount of toil and unnecessary waiting associated with each change. (It also [reduces our carbon footprint by reducing unnecessary GitHub Action time](https://github.blog/2021-04-22-environmental-sustainability-github/)).
```
